docs: LXD CSI driver (#16683)
canonical/lxd: doc/howto/storage_csi.md

(howto-storage-csi)=
# How to use the LXD CSI driver with Kubernetes

Learn how to get the LXD Container Storage Interface (CSI) driver running in your Kubernetes cluster.

> ## Getting started

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

(howto-storage-csi-prerequisites)=

> ### Prerequisites

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Prerequisites
```

The primary requirement is a Kubernetes cluster (of any size), running on LXD instances inside a dedicated LXD {ref}`project <exp-projects>`.

> This guide assumes you have administrative access to both LXD and the Kubernetes cluster, and that the LXD instances are running in a project named `lxd-csi-project`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide assumes you have administrative access to both LXD and the Kubernetes cluster.
```

Reviewer: As a general pattern for how-tos, rather than assume specific names, provide the syntax, then examples with specific names as needed. Providing specific names is a pattern for tutorials.

(howto-storage-csi-authorization)=
### Authorization

By default, the {ref}`DevLXD API <dev-lxd>` is not allowed to manage storage volumes or attach them to instances.

> You must enable this by setting {config:option}`instance-security:security.devlxd.management.volumes` to `true` on all LXD instances where the CSI driver will be running.

Reviewer: ````suggestion
You must enable this by setting {config:option}`instance-security:security.devlxd.management.volumes` to `true` on all LXD instances where the CSI driver will be running:

```sh
lxc config set <instance-name> --project <project-name> security.devlxd.management.volumes=true
```

````

> For example, to enable DevLXD volume management on instance `node-1`, run:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, to enable DevLXD volume management on instance `node-1` on a project named `lxd-csi-project`, run:
```

```sh
lxc config set node-1 --project lxd-csi-project security.devlxd.management.volumes=true
```

You can also use a LXD profile to apply this setting to multiple instances at once.

```{admonition} Limitation
:class: note
LXD CSI is limited to Kubernetes clusters that are running within a single LXD project.
```

At this point, DevLXD is allowed to access the LXD endpoint for volume management, but the LXD CSI still needs to prove it is authorized to perform such actions.

> We will create a DevLXD identity with sufficient permissions and issue a bearer token for it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You must create a DevLXD identity with sufficient permissions and issue a bearer token for it.
```

The identity must have permissions in the project where the Kubernetes nodes are running to:

+ view the project,
+ manage (view, create, edit, delete) storage volumes,
+ edit instances.

First, create a new authorization group `csi-group` with the required permissions:

```sh
lxc auth group create csi-group
lxc auth group permission add csi-group project lxd-csi-project can_view
lxc auth group permission add csi-group project lxd-csi-project storage_volume_manager
lxc auth group permission add csi-group project lxd-csi-project can_edit_instances
```

Next, create an identity `devlxd/csi` and assign the previously created group `csi-group` to it:

```sh

> lxc auth identity create devlxd/csi --group csi-group

Reviewer: ```suggestion
lxc auth identity create <identity-name> --group <group-name>
```

```

> 

Reviewer: ````suggestion

Example with an identity named `devlxd/csi` and a group named `csi-group`:

```sh
lxc auth identity create devlxd/csi --group csi-group
```
````

Reviewer: Based on the examples I provided above regarding separating command syntax from example syntax with example values, can you also update the rest of this how-to documentation?

Finally, issue a new bearer token to be used by the CSI driver:

```sh
token=$(lxc auth identity token issue devlxd/csi --quiet)
```

(howto-storage-csi-deploy)=

> ### Deploying CSI driver

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Deploy the CSI driver
```

Create a namespace `lxd-csi`:

```sh
kubectl create namespace lxd-csi --save-config
```

Create a Kubernetes secret `lxd-csi-secret` containing a previously created bearer token:

```sh
kubectl create secret generic lxd-csi-secret \
    --namespace lxd-csi \
    --from-literal=token="${token}"
```

(howto-storage-csi-deploy-helm)=

> #### Deploying CSI driver using Helm chart

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Deploy the CSI driver using a Helm chart
```

> The easiest way to deploy LXD CSI is using Helm chart:

Reviewer: General documentation practice / style to avoid using words like "simply" and "easily" as this assumes the experience of the user. It's a frustrating experience to be told by the documentation that something is "easy" or "simple" then encounter problems with it, makes people feel patronized/incompetent.

```sh
helm install lxd-csi-driver oci://ghcr.io/canonical/charts/lxd-csi-driver \
  --version v0.0.0-latest-edge \
  --namespace lxd-csi
```

```{tip}
Use the `template` command instead of `install` to see the resulting manifests.
```

The chart is configured to work *out of the box*. It deploys the CSI node server as a DaemonSet, with the CSI controller server as a single replica Deployment, and ensures minimal required access is granted to the CSI driver.

You can tweak the chart to create your desired storage classes, set resource limits, and increase the controller replica count by providing custom chart values.
The easiest way to get available values is by fetching the chart's default values:

```sh
helm show values oci://ghcr.io/canonical/charts/lxd-csi-driver --version v0.0.0-latest-edge > values.yaml
```

```{tip}
Use the `--values` flag with Helm commands to apply your modified values file.
```

(howto-storage-csi-deploy-manual)=

> #### Deploying CSI driver using manifests

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Deploy the CSI driver using manifests
```

Alternatively, you can deploy the LXD CSI controller and node servers from manifests that can be found in the [deploy](https://github.com/canonical/lxd-csi-driver/tree/main/deploy) directory of the LXD CSI Driver GitHub repository.

```sh
git clone https://github.com/canonical/lxd-csi-driver
cd lxd-csi-driver
kubectl apply -f deploy/
```

(howto-storage-csi-usage)=

> ## Usage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Usage examples
```

> This document provides practical examples of configuring StorageClass and PersistentVolumeClaim (PVC) resources when using the LXD CSI driver.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section provides practical examples of configuring StorageClass and PersistentVolumeClaim (PVC) resources when using the LXD CSI driver.
```

The first specifies the name of the LXD CSI driver, which defaults to `lxd.csi.canonical.com`, and the second references a target storage pool where the driver will create volumes.

```yaml
apiVersion: storage.k8s.io/v1
kind: StorageClass
metadata:
  name: lxd-csi-fs
provisioner: lxd.csi.canonical.com  # Name of the LXD CSI driver.
parameters:
  storagePool: my-lxd-pool          # Name of the target LXD storage pool.
```

(howto-storage-csi-usage-storageclass-default)=
#### Default StorageClass

The default StorageClass is used when `storageClass` is not explicitly set in the PVC configuration.
You can mark a Kubernetes StorageClass as the default by setting the `storageclass.kubernetes.io/is-default-class: "true"` annotation.

```yaml
apiVersion: storage.k8s.io/v1
kind: StorageClass
metadata:
  name: lxd-csi-sc
  annotations:
    storageclass.kubernetes.io/is-default-class: "true"
provisioner: lxd.csi.canonical.com
parameters:
  storagePool: my-lxd-pool
```

(howto-storage-csi-usage-storageclass-volume-binding)=
#### Immediate volume binding

By default, volume binding is set to `WaitForFirstConsumer`, which delays volume creation until the Pod is scheduled.

> Setting volume binding mode to `Immediate` instructs Kubernetes to provision the volume as soon as the PVC is created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Setting the volume binding mode to `Immediate` instructs Kubernetes to provision the volume as soon as the PVC is created.
```

parameters:
  storagePool: my-lxd-pool
```

(howto-storage-csi-usage-storageclass-volume-reclaim)=
#### Prevent volume deletion

By default, the volume is deleted when its PVC is removed.
Setting the reclaim policy to `Retain` prevents the CSI driver from deleting the underlying LXD volume, allowing for manual cleanup or data recovery later.

```yaml
apiVersion: storage.k8s.io/v1
kind: StorageClass
metadata:
  name: lxd-csi-retain
provisioner: lxd.csi.canonical.com
reclaimPolicy: Retain               # Default is "Delete"
parameters:
  storagePool: my-lxd-pool
```

(howto-storage-csi-usage-storageclass-helm)=
#### Configure StorageClass using Helm chart

The LXD CSI Helm chart allows defining multiple storage classes as part of the deployment.
Each entry in the `storageClasses` list must include at least `name` and `storagePool`.

```yaml
# values.yaml
storageClasses:
- name: lxd-csi-fs         # Name of the StorageClass (required).
  storagePool: my-pool     # Name of the target LXD storage pool (required).
- name: lxd-csi-fs-retain
  storagePool: my-pool
  reclaimPolicy: Retain
```

(howto-storage-csi-usage-pvc)=
### PersistentVolumeClaim configuration

> A PVC requests storage volume from a StorageClass.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A PVC requests a storage volume from a StorageClass.
```
